docs: Proposed changes to Placement Rules in SQL syntax (#26221)
pingcap/tidb: docs/design/2020-06-24-placement-rules-in-sql.md

- Increase the replica count of more important data
- Separate irrelevant data into different stores to improve availability

> These scenarios usually fit into one of the following categories:

Reviewer: > - Place latest data to SSD and history data to HDD
> - Place the leader of hot data to a high-performance TiKV instance

These scenarios is not covered in this document, since it seem to only cover whole database/tables/partitions/indexes and not ranges/list of data within. Also the first would probably need some kind of dynamic way of transition data from 'latest' to 'old'.
If the idea is that partitioning management will cover this, then I think it should be explicit (and give some time to improve).

Author: I have added a specific section for examples. Can you comment if you'd like to see any specific examples added?

This proposal makes some intentional decisions so that both categories of use-cases can be handled correctly. It improves upon the earlier proposal by reducing the risk of misconfiguration which can affect compliance use cases.

## Detailed Design

### New Syntax Overview

There are two ways to specify placement rules:

1. By assigning `PLACEMENT` directly on a database, table or partition (direct assignment)
2. By creating a new `PLACEMENT POLICY` and then applying the placement policy to a database, table or partition (placement policy)

Using a `PLACEMENT POLICY` will be recommended for compliance requirements, since it can allow administrators to better keep track of usage. This can be seen as similar to how complex environments will use `ROLES` for management instead of directly assigning privileges to users.

Both syntaxes are considered a [`table_option`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/alter-table.html), and available in both `CREATE TABLE` and `ALTER TABLE` contexts.

#### Direct assignment

Creating a new table with a directly assigned `PLACEMENT` constraints:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)

> ) PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;

Reviewer 2: If it's in the `create table` statement, there are 2 problems:
1. When exporting the table to MySQL by Dumpling, MySQL can't recognize it.
2. When exporting the table to TiDB by Dumpling, the downstream TiDB may do not have the same zones.

Will these be trubles?

Author: Yes, they might be. I have this in `Unresolved Questions > Behaviors`. We will have to discuss which is the correct behavior (warn or error). I'm not sure actually, I can see advantages to both.

Reviewer 3: When dumping `CREATE TABLE` info I would expect TiDB specific things to be in a comment, just like the `CLUSTERED` keyword for the primary key:

<pre><span style="background-color:#E4E4E4"><font color="#005F5F">5.7.25-TiDB-v5.2.0-alpha-274-g9abf9d0bb</font></span><span style="background-color:#3A3A3A"><font color="#E4E4E4"></font></span><span style="background-color:#3A3A3A"><font color="#FDF6E3"> 127.0.0.1:4000 </font></span><span style="background-color:#6C6C6C"><font color="#3A3A3A"></font></span><span style="background-color:#6C6C6C"><font color="#FDF6E3"> test </font></span><span style="background-color:#D75F00"><font color="#6C6C6C"></font></span><span style="background-color:#D75F00"><font color="#FDF6E3"> SQL </font></span><span style="background-color:#073642"><font color="#D75F00"> </font></span>create table t1 (id serial primary key);
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.1621 sec)
<span style="background-color:#E4E4E4"><font color="#005F5F">5.7.25-TiDB-v5.2.0-alpha-274-g9abf9d0bb</font></span><span style="background-color:#3A3A3A"><font color="#E4E4E4"></font></span><span style="background-color:#3A3A3A"><font color="#FDF6E3"> 127.0.0.1:4000 </font></span><span style="background-color:#6C6C6C"><font color="#3A3A3A"></font></span><span style="background-color:#6C6C6C"><font color="#FDF6E3"> test </font></span><span style="background-color:#D75F00"><font color="#6C6C6C"></font></span><span style="background-color:#D75F00"><font color="#FDF6E3"> SQL </font></span><span style="background-color:#073642"><font color="#D75F00"> </font></span>show create table t1\G
*************************** 1. row ***************************
       Table: t1
Create Table: CREATE TABLE `t1` (
  `id` bigint(20) unsigned NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  PRIMARY KEY (`id`) /*T![clustered_index] CLUSTERED */,
  UNIQUE KEY `id` (`id`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin
1 row in set (0.0008 sec)
</pre>

Author: Yes indeed, this is clarified under "show create table".

The problem is the behavior when it knows how to parse the syntax, but the named `PLACEMENT POLICY` has not been defined. This behavior (warning or error) is what is in question.

Reviewer 3: I think that should be an error.

Author: Thanks, that is currently how it is defined. The next question is how dumpers should work around restore if they need to. It is a similar problem to how `SET FOREIGN_KEY_CHECKS=0` is pre-pended by mysqldump etc.

(There is another conversation below about this. It can be an option like this, or a way to change the `SHOW CREATE TABLE` output.)

Reviewer 4: We can make it a special type of comments, just like 

```
 /*T![clustered_index] CLUSTERED */
```

in

```
CREATE TABLE `tbl_0` (
  `col_0` tinytext CHARACTER SET utf8 COLLATE utf8_bin NOT NULL,
  `col_1` char(238) COLLATE utf8mb4_unicode_ci NOT NULL,
  `col_2` char(222) CHARACTER SET utf8 COLLATE utf8_unicode_ci NOT NULL,
  `col_3` tinytext COLLATE utf8mb4_general_ci DEFAULT NULL,
  `col_4` text CHARACTER SET utf8 COLLATE utf8_bin NOT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`col_2`(3),`col_0`(1)) /*T![clustered_index] CLUSTERED */,
  UNIQUE KEY `idx_1` (`col_1`(1))
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin

```

Reviewer 4: e.g.

```
CREATE TABLE t1 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)
) /*T![placement] CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1 */
```

Author: I have added `PLACEMENT_CHECKS=0` based on `FOREIGN_KEY_CHECKS=0` to the proposal. The default is to check.

> ) PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;

Reviewer: This is the first place `zone` is mentioned. Maybe add a bit more context on what zone means here? In the [PD placement documentation](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/configure-placement-rules) it mentions zone,rack,host is that relevant in also in this document?

Reviewer 5: > Maybe add a bit more context on what zone means here?

You can think it as city. It doesnt have meanings. You can label any kv pair. But tidb-operator will label zone/rack/host accordingly. But yes, maybe have an explanation.

Reviewer 6: I think we need to make some words become reserved words, especially related to locality.

Reviewer 7: Can we using '[zone=sh]' instad of '[+zone=sh]', I don't get why the '+' is needed.

Reviewer 8: Here we use the sign as 'allow/forbid list':
- '+' as 'Required' 
- '-' as 'Prohibited'.

Reviewer 6: Mapped to the placement rule, '+' meaning `in`, '-' meaning `notin`

> ) PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;

Author: I've improved the syntax based on discussion, so it is simpler.. and they are all table_options individually now.

I think this incorporates your feedback (minus the JSON part). PTAL again and let me know.

```

Adding `PLACEMENT` to an existing table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)
);

> ALTER TABLE t1 PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;

Reviewer 3: Some of the examples have multiple `ROLE=`, `REPLICAS=` and `CONSTRAINTS=` options
for which the order seems to be important. What about replacing this with a JSON
structure? That can more easily be parsed and changed by applications.

Also these names seem to be very generic, so it could happen (but is unlikely)
that MySQL would use the same in a next version.

Reviewer 4: we can actually make them a json structure into CONSTRANTS, like

```
ALTER TABLE t1 PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS+="{'zone': '+sh', 'role': 'leader', 'replicas': 1}",  CONSTRAINTS+="{'zone': '+sh', 'role': 'follower', 'replicas': 1}", CONSTRAINTS+="{'zone': '+gz', 'role': 'follower', 'replicas': 1}";

Reviewer 4: in this case, CONSTRANTS are actually a list of JSON objects.

Reviewer 4: futher modification can happen directly on the CONSTRANTS object.

Author: This has been updated with new proposed syntax, PTAL again thx :-)

```

#### Placement Policy

Creating a new `PLACEMENT POLICY`:

```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY `companystandardpolicy` CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;
```

Creating a new table with a `PLACEMENT POLICY`:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)
) PLACEMENT POLICY=`companystandardpolicy`;
```

Adding `PLACEMENT POLICY` to an existing table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)
);

> ALTER TABLE t1 PLACEMENT POLICY=`companystandardpolicy`;

Reviewer 2: I'm always wondering when should there be a `SET` and `=`.
E.g. setting tiflash replicas: `ALTER TABLE table_name SET TIFLASH REPLICA count`.
I think it should also be consistent with setting region labels in the future.

Author: In this instance, I copied the `PLACEMENT` (removing `ALTER PLACEMENT`) from [`CREATE TABLE`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/create-table.html) and [`ALTER TABLE`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/alter-table.html) considered it a _table_option_.

For `POLICY=x` versus POLICY 'x'`, the table options are actually inconsistent with this (most do use `=`, but `TABLESPACE` for example does not). It also made sense to use `POLICY=` so this explicitly refered to a named global `POLICY` versus `CONSTRAINTS=` refers to an inline policy.

For `SET TIFLASH REPLICA count`, I agree this is actually inconsistent with MySQL. The only scenario in an `ALTER TABLE` where `SET` is used, is in `CHARACTER SET`, or in `ALTER TABLE.. ALTER COLUMN`.

I plan to review the region labels feature tomorrow and make this same comment.

```

Expected Behaviors:
- `CREATE` or `ALTER` and specifying a `PLACEMENT POLICY` that does not exist results in an error: placement policy 'x' is not defined (TBD: see "unresolved questions")

> - Placement policies are globally unique names. Thus; a policy named `companyplacementpolicy` can apply to the db `test` as well as `userdb`. The namespace does not overlap with other DB objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Placement policies are globally unique names. Thus, a policy named `companyplacementpolicy` can apply to the db `test` as well as `userdb`. The namespace does not overlap with other DB objects.
```

- Placement Policy names are case insensitive, and follow the same rules as tables/other identifiers for length (64 chars) and special characters.
- The full placement policy can be seen with `SHOW CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY x`. This is useful for shorthand usage by DBAs, and consistent with other database objects.

> - It is possible to update the definition of a placement policy with `ALTER PLACEMENT POLICY x CONSTRAINTS ..;` This is modeled on the statement `ALTER VIEW` (where the view needs to be redefined)

Author: Yes, I'll make it clearer. What's not clear yet is if that is a lot of objects - should it change it synchronously (`ALTER PLACEMENT POLICY` blocks) or async? (I will add it to unanswered questions; it is more vague with `DROP PLACEMENT POLICY`).

> - The statement `DROP PLACEMENT POLICY` should return an error if the policy is in use by any objects (TBD: see "unresolved questions")

Reviewer 9: Any example for statement `DROP PLACEMENT POLICY` ?

Reviewer 4: Can we add a show policy usage SQL?

e.g. `SHOW PLACEMENT POLICY USAGE FOR x` and list the table, partition, database that used this policy?

Author: I have added `SHOW PLACEMENT LIKE 'standardpol%';`, thanks!

#### Metadata commands

> Besides `SHOW CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY x`, it should be possible to summarize all placement for a database system. This is beneficial for compliance scenarios.

Author: SHOW CREATE TABLE will show `.. PLACEMENT POLICY=policyname`. May I ask what you mean by anonymous?

> Besides `SHOW CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY x`, it should be possible to summarize all placement for a database system. This is beneficial for compliance scenarios.

Reviewer 8: I guess @AilinKid means that 'you can create a policy with a create table statement'. However I don't think we would support it.

> Besides `SHOW CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY x`, it should be possible to summarize all placement for a database system. This is beneficial for compliance scenarios.

Author: OK I understand now. Yes, `CREATE TABLE` supports all the same options as `CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY`. So you can consider `CREATE TABLE` as like an anonymous function.

#### information_schema.placement_rules

A new system table `information_schema.placement_rules` is added to view all placement rules. The table contains such columns:

* rule_id
* target ID
* target name
* constraints
* role

> * replicas

Reviewer 4: If we make constrants a list of json objects, we can remove role and replicas here.

Reviewer 4: note list of json object is also a json object, and TiDB supports JSON (though not GAed yet, but we can always eat out own dog food)

Author: This has been improved in the newer syntax. PTAL again, thx!

* scheduling state

> The system table is a virtual table, which doesn’t persist data. When querying the table, TiDB queries PD and integrates the result in a table format. That also means the metadata is stored on PD instead of TiKV.

Author: I have defined it a little bit closer as:
```
The table contains columns such as:

* `rule_definition`: the placement policy definition (could be PLACEMENT POLICY=x, syntactic sugar variant or full list of constraints)
* `followers`: the number of followers
* `learners`: the number of learners
* `voters`: the number of voters
* `schema_name`: the schema this applies to.
* `table_name`: the table this applies to.
* `partition_name`: the partition this applies to (NULL if not applicable)
* `scheduling state`: the scheduling state of the placement rule.
```

But we could consider JSON instead. I don't mind if we change this as we get closer to the implementation.

An object may contain multiple placement rules, each of which corresponds to a rule in PD.

Advantages of building system table include:

* It’s easy for users to filter and aggregate the result
* There’s no need to support a new grammar, and it’s easier to implement

#### SHOW PLACEMENT

The system table only contains stored placement rules, and users cannot query the effective rule of one object from it.

For example, table `t` has two partitions `p0` and `p1`, and a placement rule is added on `t`. If the user wants to query the working rule of `p0`, he will find no placement rule is defined for `p0` through the system table. Based on the inheritance rules for partitioned tables the user needs to query the placement rule on `t`. This procedure is annoying.

To simplify the procedure, a `SHOW PLACEMENT` statement is provided to summarize the effective rules for one specified object.

The statement is in such a format:

```sql
SHOW PLACEMENT FOR {DATABASE | SCHEMA} schema_name;
SHOW PLACEMENT FOR TABLE table_name [PARTITION partition_name];

> SHOW PLACEMENT FOR INDEX index_name FROM table_name [PARTITION partition_name];

Author: I've been removing INDEX from the proposal since it is not useful for now. It does have a very clear use-case with global indexes for partitioned tables however.

* Existing placement: All the executed `ALTER` statements that affect the placement of `target`, including the statements on its parent.
* Scheduling state: The scheduling progress from the PD aspect.

### Updates to Existing Syntax

#### CREATE DATABASE / ALTER DATABASE

The semantics of a `PLACEMENT POLICY` on a database/schema should be similar to the [default character set attribute](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/charset-database.html). For example:

```sql
CREATE DATABASE mydb [DEFAULT] PLACEMENT POLICY=`companystandardpolicy`;
CREATE TABLE mydb.t1 (a INT);
ALTER DATABASE mydb [DEFAULT] PLACEMENT POLICY=`companynewpolicy`;
CREATE TABLE mydb.t2 (a INT);
CREATE TABLE mydb.t3 (a INT) PLACEMENT POLICY=`companystandardpolicy`;
```

* The tables t1 and t3 are created with the policy `companystandardpolicy` and the table t2 is created with `companynewpolicy`.
* The `DATABASE` default only affects tables when they are created and there is no explicit placement policy defined.
* Thus, the inheritance rules only apply when tables are being created, and if the database policy changes this will not update the table values. This differs slightly for table partitions.

> * The statement `SHOW CREATE DATABASE` is also available, and will show the [DEFAULT] PLACEMENT POLICY in TiDB feature specific comments (/*T![placement] DEFAULT PLACEMENT POLICY x */)

Author: Currently only Table/Partition. In future Table/Partition/Global Index.

I have not added any "special" system placement policies for system meta data. Something like this exists in CRDB and we could potentially add this, so things like replica count could be increased.

> * The statement `SHOW CREATE DATABASE` is also available, and will show the [DEFAULT] PLACEMENT POLICY in TiDB feature specific comments (/*T![placement] DEFAULT PLACEMENT POLICY x */)

Author: I've added an unresolved question for this: `Should we have "built-in" placement policies?`

CREATE TABLE t1 (a int);
SHOW CREATE TABLE t1;
-->
CREATE TABLE `t1` (
  `a` int(11) DEFAULT NULL
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin;

CREATE TABLE t2 (a int) PLACEMENT POLICY='acdc';
SHOW CREATE TABLE t2;
-->
CREATE TABLE `t2` (
  `a` int(11) DEFAULT NULL
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin /*T![placement] PLACEMENT POLICY=`acdc` */;

ALTER DATABASE test DEFAULT PLACEMENT POLICY=`acdc`;
CREATE TABLE t2 (a int);
SHOW CREATE TABLE t3;
-->
CREATE TABLE `t3` (
  `a` int(11) DEFAULT NULL
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin /*T![placement]  PLACEMENT POLICY=`acdc` */;
```

This helps ensure the highest level of compatibility between both TiDB versions and MySQL.

### Placement Rules Syntax

#### Constraints configuration

`CONSTRAINTS` option in the `CREATE TABLE .. PLACEMENT ..` or `CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY` clauses indicates the label constraints. Data must be placed on the stores whose labels conform to `CONSTRAINTS` constraints. If `CONSTRAINTS` is omitted, it means no label constraint is enforced, thus the replicas can be placed anywhere.

Option `CONSTRAINTS` should be a string and in one of these formats:

> 

Reviewer 5: > What if CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=bj1,+zone=bj2,+zone=bj3,+zone=bj4,-zone=bj5]" REPLICAS=3, will there be one of the bj1-4 zones without a replica?

It is not valid. You can not specify multiple `+zone=xx` in one `constraints`.

> exists or notExists

They are not that useful/powerful, IMO. `exists` only asserts the label key, not the value. `in` and `notIn` could be the alternative.

There are two ways to specify placement rules:

1. By assigning `PLACEMENT` directly on a database, table or partition (direct assignment)
2. By creating a new `PLACEMENT POLICY` and then applying the placement policy to a database, table or partition (placement policy)

Using a `PLACEMENT POLICY` will be recommended for compliance requirements, since it can allow administrators to better keep track of usage. This can be seen as similar to how complex environments will use `ROLES` for management instead of directly assigning privileges to users.

Both syntaxes are considered a [`table_option`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/alter-table.html), and available in both `CREATE TABLE` and `ALTER TABLE` contexts.

#### Direct assignment

Creating a new table with a directly assigned `PLACEMENT` constraints:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)
) PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;
```

Adding `PLACEMENT` to an existing table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t2 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)
);

> ALTER TABLE t2 PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;

Reviewer 7: Is the `""` necessary?

Author: I assume you mean the `""` around `CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]"`?

If we remove the quotes, it is not clear from a semantic perspective if certain conditions should be evaluated while parsing (it does contain +, = etc.)

I also prefer it because then it is clear that it is one string with a set of rules. So you can apply the value from a session variable etc.

```

Creating a new table with a `PLACEMENT POLICY`:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)
) PLACEMENT POLICY=`companystandardpolicy`;
```

Adding `PLACEMENT POLICY` to an existing table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t2 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)
);
ALTER TABLE t2 PLACEMENT POLICY=`companystandardpolicy`;
```

Expected Behaviors:
- `CREATE` or `ALTER` and specifying a `PLACEMENT POLICY` that does not exist results in an error: placement policy 'x' is not defined (TBD: see "unresolved questions")
- Placement policies are globally unique names. Thus, a policy named `companyplacementpolicy` can apply to the db `test` as well as `userdb`. The namespace does not overlap with other DB objects.
- Placement Policy names are case insensitive, and follow the same rules as tables/other identifiers for length (64 chars) and special characters.
- The full placement policy can be seen with `SHOW CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY x`. This is useful for shorthand usage by DBAs, and consistent with other database objects.

> - It is possible to update the definition of a placement policy with `ALTER PLACEMENT POLICY x CONSTRAINTS ..;` This is modeled on the statement `ALTER VIEW` (where the view needs to be redefined). When `ALTER PLACEMENT POLICY x` is executed, all tables that use this placement policy will need to be updated in pd.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- It is possible to update the definition of a placement policy with `ALTER PLACEMENT POLICY x CONSTRAINTS ..;` This is modeled on the statement `ALTER VIEW` (where the view needs to be redefined). When `ALTER PLACEMENT POLICY x` is executed, all tables that use this placement policy will need to be updated in PD.
```

```

The only way to judge whether it’s adding a TiFlash replica is to check the label. If it contains `engine=tiflash`, then it’s adding or removing a TiFlash replica. This logic is conventional in PD for now.

#### Specifying role count

The roles `FOLLOWERS`, `LEARNERS` and `VOTERS` also support an optional count. For example:

```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY `standardplacement1` PRIMARY REGION="us-east-1" REGIONS="us-east-1,us-east-2" FOLLOWERS=4;
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY `standardplacement2` LEADER_CONSTRAINTS="[+region=us-east-1]"  FOLLOWERS_CONSTRAINTS="[+region=us-east-1,+region=us-east-2]" FOLLOWERS=4;
```

If the constraints is specified as a dictionary (e.g. `{"+region=us-east-1":1}`), and the count is smaller than the minimum number required to satisfy the constraint rule, then an error should be returned.
Constraints do not automatically increase the count of the role, so if a larger number than the default is required it must be specified:

```sql
FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="{+region=us-east-1:1,-region=us-east-2:2}" FOLLOWERS=2 // error, requires 3
FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="{+region=us-east-1:1,-region=us-east-2:2}" // default is 2, so also error
```

> This changes an earlier proposal where the minimum count could be inferred by the constraints. The motivation for this change is to reduce the risk of misconfiguration in the event that rules are complex. See also "Policy Validation" below.

Author: @xhebox Can you review this proposed change? I don't believe we have discussed it, but when reading through I realized this was another ambigous case that could lead to misconfiguration.

Reviewer 5: Actually, I would suggest ban using dict and replicas... It is not intuitive for me. Maybe replace `FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="{+region=us-east-1:1,-region=us-east-2:2}" FOLLOWERS=6` with `FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="{+region=us-east-1:1,-region=us-east-2:2, *:3}"` or so.

Author: Makes sense to me. I'm just a little hung up on the `*` character. Is there an alternative syntax we can use? Maybe `any:3`?

Reviewer 5: No, I did not come up with any good. "any", "others", "free", or maybe just "replicas/count"?

Author: count/replicas is ambiguous because it doesn't indicate if it is inclusive or exclusive of the previously defined ones. I will go with `any`, and we can change it if needed later.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/26221/commits/9ed4000bfd9ba578eff5d43aaaccf53c6300bcff

For example, `+region=us-east-1,+region=us-east-2,-disk=hdd` is equivalent to:

```
"label_constraints": [
	{"key": "region", "op": "in", "values": ["us-east-1", "us-east-2"]},
	{"key": "disk", "op": "notIn", "values": ["hdd"]}
]
```

Field `location_labels` in PD placement rule configuration is used to isolate replicas to different zones to improve availability. For now, the global configuration can be used as the default `location_labels` for all placement rules defined in SQL, so it's unnecessary to specify it.

`PLACEMENT` also supports adding TiFlash replicas for a table, as statement `ALTER TABLE table_name SET TIFLASH REPLICA count` does. For example:

```sql
ALTER TABLE t1
	LEARNER_CONSTRAINTS="[+engine=tiflash]" LEARNERS=1;
```

The only way to judge whether it’s adding a TiFlash replica is to check the label. If it contains `engine=tiflash`, then it’s adding or removing a TiFlash replica. This logic is conventional in PD for now.

#### Specifying role count

The roles `FOLLOWERS`, `LEARNERS` and `VOTERS` also support an optional count in *list* format. For example:

```sql

> CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY `standardplacement1` PRIMARY REGION="us-east-1" REGIONS="us-east-1,us-east-2" FOLLOWERS=4;

Reviewer 6: I think we need to clarify the meaning of PRIMARY, which one？
-  the leader is placed in the Region (improve read)
-  the leader is placed in the Region, and the majority of replicas are placed in the primary region (improve read and write)

Reviewer 6: In addition, maybe we need to comment that if you do not specify replicas number, then the number of the replicas 
 inherited from up level.

Author: @nolouch I think that it means the leader is placed in that region. Whether the majority of replicas are placed there as well depends on the `SCHEDULE` (i.e. what the balancing goal is).

So one `SCHEDULE` should imply most are local for fast quorum, and another might aim for balanced across as many regions as possible.

Author: This has been addressed in https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/26221/commits/af6c0ce8fa2a9f52aba4282c9f74d6719ba37fa9

- Increase the replica count of more important data
- Separate irrelevant data into different stores to improve availability

These scenarios usually fit into one of the following categories:

1. An optimization or availability use case (such as improving data access locality)
2. A compliance use case (such as ensuring data resides within a geographic region)

This proposal makes some intentional decisions so that both categories of use-cases can be handled correctly. It improves upon the earlier proposal by reducing the risk of misconfiguration which can affect compliance use cases.

## Detailed Design

### New Syntax Overview

There are two ways to specify placement rules:

1. By assigning placement directly on a database, table or partition (direct assignment)
2. By creating a new `PLACEMENT POLICY` and then applying the placement policy to a database, table or partition (placement policy)

Using a `PLACEMENT POLICY` will be recommended for compliance requirements, since it can allow administrators to better keep track of usage. This can be seen as similar to how complex environments will use `ROLES` for management instead of directly assigning privileges to users.

> Both syntaxes are considered [`table_option`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/alter-table.html)s, and available in both `CREATE TABLE` and `ALTER TABLE` contexts.

Reviewer 8: Customers may use the 'pd-ctl' to set placement rule, what is the expected behavior if the placement rule that is set by 'pd-ctl' is inconsistent with SQL?

Reviewer 5: Discussed with zhangming before, and the result is that we don't care. You can't prevent customers from inserting invalid rules. And it will take effect immediately despite TiDB have or don't have a mechanism to synchronize rules from persistent storage to PD.

#### Direct Assignment

Creating a new table with directly assigned constraints. The leader is in `us-east-1` region, the followers are in `us-east-1` and `us-east-2`:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)

> ) PRIMARY REGION="us-east-1" REGIONS="us-east-1,us-east-2";

Author: Yes it will. Unfortunately "region" is the most widely used term for data center geography, so avoiding it's use only complicates our terminology problem.

My proposal is that in documentation we refer to these as "Placement Regions" and update the existing terminology to "Data Regions".

* `voters`: the number of voters
* `schema_name`: the schema this applies to.
* `table_name`: the table this applies to.
* `partition_name`: the partition this applies to (NULL if not applicable)
* `scheduling state`: the scheduling state of the placement rule.

The system table is a virtual table, which doesn’t persist data. When querying the table, TiDB queries PD and integrates the result in a table format. That also means the metadata is stored on PD instead of TiKV.

##### SHOW PLACEMENT

The `information_schema.placement_rules` table only contains stored placement rules, and users cannot query the effective rule of one object from it.

For example, table `t` has two partitions `p0` and `p1`, and a placement rule is added on `t`. If the user wants to query the working rule of `p0`, he will find no placement rule is defined for `p0` through the system table. Based on the inheritance rules for partitioned tables the user needs to query the placement rule on `t`. This procedure is annoying.

To simplify the procedure, a `SHOW PLACEMENT` statement is provided to summarize the effective rules for one specified object.

The statement is in such a format:

```sql

> SHOW PLACEMENT FOR [{DATABASE | SCHEMA} schema_name] [TABLE table_name] [PARTITION partition_name];

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SHOW PLACEMENT FOR [{DATABASE | SCHEMA} schema_name] [TABLE table_name [PARTITION partition_name]];
```

For example, `FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="[+region=us-east-1,+region=us-east-2]" FOLLOWERS=3` indicates to place 3 followers on either `us-east-1` or `us-east-1`. There may be 2 replicas on `us-east-1` and 1 in `us-east-2`, or 2 in `us-east-2` and 1 in `us-east-1`. It's up to PD (see "Schedule Property" for additional details).

Label constraints can be implemented by defining `label_constraints` field in PD placement rule configuration. `+` and `-` correspond to property `op`. Specifically, `+` is equivalent to `in` and `-` is equivalent to `notIn`.

For example, `+region=us-east-1,+region=us-east-2,-disk=hdd` is equivalent to:

```
"label_constraints": [
	{"key": "region", "op": "in", "values": ["us-east-1", "us-east-2"]},
	{"key": "disk", "op": "notIn", "values": ["hdd"]}
]
```

Field `location_labels` in PD placement rule configuration is used to isolate replicas to different zones to improve availability. For now, the global configuration can be used as the default `location_labels` for all placement rules defined in SQL, so it's unnecessary to specify it.

> `PLACEMENT` also supports adding TiFlash replicas for a table, as the statement `ALTER TABLE table_name SET TIFLASH REPLICA count` does. For example:

Reviewer 8: What is the expected relation between placement rule in SQL and the 'SET REPLICA' statement?

```
ALTER TABLE table_name SET TIFLASH REPLICA count
```

Reviewer 5: The current impl ignore tiflash, because it is not verified that placement rules works with tiflash.

Reviewer 8: Is there any known issue/concern for Placement Rules in SQL and TiFlash?

Reviewer 5: Replicas does not work well for tiflash, since the standard `set tiflash replicas` requires another HTTP api access. And schedule did not work for tiflash too due to key format, but it is fixed in the very early stage.

```

If the constraints is specified as a dictionary (e.g. `{"+region=us-east-1":1}`) the count is not applicable and an error is returned:

```sql
FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="{+region=us-east-1:1,-region=us-east-2:2}" FOLLOWERS=3 // technically accurate, but an error
FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="{+region=us-east-1:1,-region=us-east-2:2}" FOLLOWERS=2 // an error
```

For dictionary format, the count is inferred by the constraint. The following constraint creates 4 followers:

```sql
FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="{+region=us-east-1:1,-region=us-east-2:2,+any:1}"
```

Explanation:
- 1 follower in `us-east-1`
- 2 followers not in `us-east-2`
- 1 follower in any region (a special label of `+any`)

`+any` changes an earlier proposal where the `FOLLOWERS` count could also be specified. This has been removed to reduce the risk of discrepancies and misconfiguration. See also "Policy Validation" below.

#### Built-in Placement Policies

By default every system will have two placement policies, which can be modified via `ALTER PLACEMENT POLICY` but never dropped:

* `default`: This policy is used only in the event that a policy has not been specified.

> * `system`: This policy is used for internal TiDB system tables.

Reviewer 10: Does meta data belong to `system` too? they are structured data that are not in tables.

Author: Yes it should. We can also add a new builtin `metadata` if that is more appropriate.

The two methods **are mutually exclusive**. Specifying both in a `CREATE`/`ALTER` statement will result in an error. Specifying a `PLACEMENT POLICY` on a table with direct assignment options will clear those options.

#### Direct Assignment

Creating a new table with directly assigned constraints. The leader is in `us-east-1` region, the followers are in `us-east-1` and `us-east-2`:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)
) PRIMARY_REGION="us-east-1" REGIONS="us-east-1,us-east-2";
```

In this context, "REGION" and "REGIONS" are syntactic sugar which map to the label `region`. The following labels have special reserved words (the plural is used in contexts such as followers where multiple is possible):
- `host` and `hosts`: expected to be the same physical machine or hypervisor.
- `rack` and `racks`: similar to host; a group of machines that are physically close together and may suffer from many of the same failures.
- `zone` and `zones`: similar to an AWS zone; much larger degree of blast radius isolation from a rack, but still vulnerable to issues such as a natural disaster.

> - `region` and `regions`: expected to be distributed far enough apart that there is isolation from disasters.

Reviewer 11: does this mean the following syntax is accepted?

```sql
create table t8 (a int)
  primary_host 'h1' hosts 'h1,h2,h3'
  primary_rack 'ρ2' racks 'ρ1,ρ2,ρ3'
  primary_zone 'z3' zones 'z1,z2,z3'
  primary_region 'r1' regions 'r1,r2,r3';
```

Author: Yes

To use additional labels not in this list, see "Advanced Placement" below.

#### Explicit Placement Syntax

Creating a new `PLACEMENT POLICY`:

```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY `standardplacement` PRIMARY_REGION="us-east-1" REGIONS="us-east-1,us-east-2"
```

Creating a new table with the `PLACEMENT POLICY` assigned:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)

> ) PLACEMENT POLICY=`standardplacement`;

Reviewer 6: For simplicity, maybe only allow binding one policy at present.

> ) PLACEMENT POLICY=`standardplacement`;

Author: Yes. Only one should be supported.

This is not explicitly stated for `placement policy p8 placement policy p9`, but it does state already that placement policy + direct placement are mutually exclusive (an error is returned) and the syntax no longer supports multiple constraints to be specified in direct placement.

1. The `FOLLOWERS` count should respect raft quorum expectations. The default is `2` (which creates raft groups of 3). If the number is odd, it could lead to split brain scenarios, so a warning should be issued. Warnings should also be issued for a count less than 2 (this might be useful for development environments, so an error is not returned)
2. A policy that is impossible based on the current topology (region=us-east-1 and followers=2, but there is only 1 store in us-east-1) should be a warning. This allows for some transitional topologies.
3. If the constraints are specified as a dictionary, specifying the count (i.e. `FOLLOWERS=n`) is prohibited.
4. Specifying both direct placement rules (`{FOLLOWERS,VOTERS,LEARNERS}=N, {FOLLOWER,VOTER,LEARNER}_CONSTRAINTS, CONSTRAINTS, PRIMARY_REGION, REGIONS, SCHEDULE`) and a `PLACEMENT POLICY` is prohibited.

#### Skipping Policy Validation

It should be possible to skip policy validation. This can be seen as similar to skipping foreign key checks, which is often used by logical dumpers:

```sql
SET FOREIGN_KEY_CHECKS=0;
SET PLACEMENT_CHECKS=0;

CREATE TABLE t3 (a int) PLACEMENT POLICY `mycompanypolicy`;
```

> If a table is imported when `PLACEMENT_CHECKS` is `OFF`, and the placement policy does not validate, then the same rules of fallback apply as in the case `DROP PLACEMENT POLICY` (where policy is still in use).

Reviewer 11: if we do

```sql
set @@placement_checks = off;
create table t5 (a int) placement policy p6;
-- ...
create placement policy p6 ...;
```

is the placement policy immediately applied to table `t5` once the `create placement policy p6` statement is executed?

Author: No, I would suggest the information is lost. There is a similar case where `DROP PLACEMENT POLICY p6` resets all the tables that have this policy to the default.

This will mean that logical importers should restore placement policies first. This makes sense logically anyway, because otherwise you would need to reorganize the data after importing it.

Field `location_labels` in PD placement rule configuration is used to isolate replicas to different zones to improve availability. For now, the global configuration can be used as the default `location_labels` for all placement rules defined in SQL, so it's unnecessary to specify it.

`PLACEMENT` also supports adding TiFlash replicas for a table, as statement `ALTER TABLE table_name SET TIFLASH REPLICA count` does. For example:

```sql
ALTER TABLE table_name

> 	PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS="[+engine=tiflash]" ROLE=learner REPLICAS=1;

Reviewer 2: In this case, it means adding one more replica. However, for other cases, such a statement means to override the original placement.

```sql
ALTER TABLE test
	PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=bj]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=2,

> 	PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=voter REPLICAS=2;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=voter REPLICAS=2;
```

Reviewer 2: Do we still support `voter`?

Author: Yes. I don't have intentions to change this.

```

There are 4 replicas for table `test`, 2 of which are in `sh` and 2 are in `bj`.  Leader can only be placed on `sh`.

`ROLE` in the statement is equivalent to field `role` in PD placement rule configuration.

#### Replicas configuration

> `REPLICAS` in the statement indicates the replica count of the specified role.

Reviewer: What does `indicates` mean here? Should it be `sets`?

> 

Reviewer: Could you please also check the old row nr 274-282?
Old row nr 278
```
When all the replica counts are specified in the `CONSTRAINTS` option, `REPLICAS` can also be omitted. For example, `CONSTRAINTS="{+zone=bj:2,+zone=sh:1}", ROLE=voter` indicates that the `REPLICAS` is 3.
```
Again "indicates that the `REPLICAS` is 3" => "sets the `REPLICAS` to 3" ?
And why the comma in between `CONSTRAINTS` and `ROLE`?

Old row nr 280
```
For example, in the case `CONSTRAINTS="{+zone=bj:2,+zone=sh:1}", ROLE=voter, REPLICAS=4`, 2 replicas are in `bj` and 1 in `sh`, and the last replica can be anywhere, including `bj` and `sh`.
```
Does that mean we would need a '-zone=tw:0' in the CONSTRAINTS to *not* have any replica in tw zone?

Reviewer 5: > Does that mean we would need a '-zone=tw:0' in the CONSTRAINTS to not have any replica in tw zone?

True.

Author: I have fixed the syntax, so I think this point is resolved? Each of the options are now `table_options` without comments.

The behavior of REPLICAS (now `FOLLOWERS`, `LEADERS`, or `VOTERS` directly) has also changed so that the constraint doesn't adjust the count even if it detects it is possible. Rather, if it is not possible based on the count, you will now receive an error (see just below).

`REPLICAS` in the statement is equivalent to field `count` in PD placement rule configuration.

#### Key range configuration

In PD placement rule configuration, the key range must be specified. Now that `table_name` is specified in the `ALTER TABLE` statement, key range can be inferred.

Typically, key format is in such a format: `t_{table_id}_r_{pk_value}`, where `pk_value` may be `_tidb_rowid` in some cases. `table_id` can be inferred from `table_name`, thus key range is `t_{table_id}_` to `t_{table_id+1}_`.

> Similarly, key range of partitions can also be inferred.

Reviewer: Since `indices` is removed here, maybe all mentioning of indices/index/indexes should be removed from the whole document or clarified that indexes are not included in this document for placement policies, (other than they will end up where the database/table/partition is placed)

Author: I believe I've removed it from everywhere now, thanks!

#### Policy Validation

When placement policies are specified, they should be validated for correctness:

```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY `companystandardpolicy` CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;

> ALTER PLACEMENT POLICY `companystandardpolicy` CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;

Author: We can add `RENAME PLACEMENT POLICY x to y`.

For splitting, I would create a new policy and then just `ALTER` the tables to it. The amount of work is related to the differences in the policy, not the name of the policy. If you have two policies that are identical, they will not incur cost to change between the two.

CREATE TABLE t1 (
	id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
	b VARCHAR(100)
) PLACEMENT POLICY CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;
ALTER TABLE t1 PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;
# Only rule #3 applies for these examples

> CREATE TABLE t1 (a int) PLACEMENT POLICY `mycompanypolicy`;

Reviewer 2: I don't get it. Why create `t1` twice?

Author: These are different examples, so I will name the table `t2` instead.

ALTER TABLE t1 PLACEMENT POLICY `mycompanypolicy`;
```

1. An impossible policy such as violating raft constraints (2 leaders) should result in an error:
```sql
# error
ALTER TABLE test
	ALTER PLACEMENT POLICY CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=leader REPLICAS=2;
```

> 2. A policy that has an incorrect number of instances for a raft group (i.e. 1 leader and 1 follower, or just 1 leader and no followers) should be a warning. This allows for some transitional topologies and developer environments.

Reviewer: What should the result be? Just 1 replica then? And the rule will still be with 3, but not used until there are 3 stores?

3. A policy that is impossible based on the current topology (zone=sh and replicas=3, but there is only 1 store in sh) should be a warning. This allows for some transitional topologies.

#### Ambiguous and edge cases

The following two policies are not identical:

```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY p1 CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1, CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=1;
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY p2 CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh,+zone=gz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=2;
```

This is because "[+zone=sh,+zone=gz]" is interpreted as either sh or gz. It is possible that both replicas could end up in the same zone. This is useful in the case that you want to ensure that `REPLICAS=2` exists in any of a list of zones:

```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY p2 CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh,+zone=gz,+zone=bz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=2;
```

However, using "short hand" JSON syntax, the following 2 policies are identical:

```sql
ALTER TABLE test
	PLACEMENT POLICY CONSTRAINTS="{+zone=sh:2,+zone=bj:2}" ROLE=voter REPLICAS=4;

ALTER TABLE test
	PLACEMENT POLICY CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh]" ROLE=voter REPLICAS=2,

> 	PLACEMENT POLICY CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=bj]" ROLE=voter REPLICAS=2;

Reviewer 9: So the the expression `+label1=value1,+label1=value2,+label2=value3,+label2=value4,-label3=value5,-label3=value6` means `(label1 in (value1, value2)) and (label2 in (value3, value4)) and (label3 notin (value5, value6))`. We apply `OR` for labels with same name and `AND` for labels with different name.  Is that right?

Reviewer 5: No. For you can not schedule one follower into both `sh` and `bj`, it is banned. We can workaround later. But I agree that the semantics should be clarified.

Reviewer 9: But how to interpret this sentence above: "This is because "[+zone=sh,+zone=gz]" is interpreted as either sh or gz..."

Reviewer 5: In one `CONSTRAINTS="..."`, it is banned. But you can specify another different `CONSTRAINTS`, that becomes `OR`.

Reviewer 2: Anyway, I think it's ambiguous and hard to learn.

Author: This is now outdated because the proposal only has one set of constraints, and defines `constraints` + `follower_constraints` as AND.

#### Schedule Property

When using either the syntactic sugar or list format for placement rules, PD is free to schedule followers/leaders/voters wherever it decides. For example:

```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY `standardplacement1` PRIMARY REGION="us-east-1" REGIONS="us-east-1,us-east-2" FOLLOWERS=4;
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY `standardplacement2` LEADER_CONSTRAINTS="[+region=us-east-1]"  FOLLOWERS_CONSTRAINTS="[+region=us-east-1,+region=us-east-2]" FOLLOWERS=4;
```

- Are each of the followers split equally in us-east-1 and us-east-2?
- Could the majority of followers be placed in us-east-1? That would ensure fast quorum but reduced fault tolerance.

To address the ambiguity the concept of a "schedule" is introduced, which is the name for a strategy that PD uses to determine where to place instances. For an example:

```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY `standardplacement1` PRIMARY REGION="us-east-1" REGIONS="us-east-1,us-east-2" FOLLOWERS=4 SCHEDULE=SURVIVE_REGION_FAILURE();
```

The following `SCHEDULE` options are available:

> * `BALANCED()`: This is the default schedule. Followers will be balanced on leader balance per store. So if there are 15 stores in `us-east-1` and 5 stores in `us-east-2`, you can expect that approximately 3:1 followers will be placed in `us-east-1` to `us-east-2`.

Reviewer 6: I think this behavior is hard to clear, actually, the default scheduling does not consider this way, it's more priority to survive. I think we can't use store numbers to explain the `SCHEDULE` behavior because it can change dynamically and may cause some misunderstandings. we can say the replicas' placement behavior,  such as `SURVIVE_REGION_FAILURE()` is expected each region has a replica is more clear. BTW, I don’t think the "BALANCE" policy is needed yet, we recommend deploy with the same nodes.

CREATE TABLE t3 (a int) PLACEMENT POLICY `mycompanypolicy`;
```

If a table is imported when `PLACEMENT_CHECKS` is `OFF`, and the placement policy does not validate, then the same rules of fallback apply as in the case `DROP PLACEMENT POLICY` (where policy is still in use).

#### Ambiguous and edge cases

The following two policies are not identical:

```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY p1 FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="[+region=us-east-1,+region=us-east-2]" FOLLOWERS=2;
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY p2 FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="{+region=us-east-1:1,-region=us-east-2:1}" FOLLOWERS=2;
```

This is because p2 explicitly requires a follower count of 1 per region, whereas p2 allows for 2 in any of the above (TODO: is this correct, how does PD balance?)

This is useful in the case that you want to ensure that `REPLICAS=2` exists in any of a list of zones:

```sql

> CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY p2 CONSTRAINTS="[+zone=sh,+zone=gz,+zone=bz]" ROLE=follower REPLICAS=2;

Reviewer 5: The old syntax?

Author: Thanks, fixed

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Restrict all data in a partition/table/database to one or more defined zones, i.e. keep sensitive data inside a specific set of zones (How about metadata?)
* not allowing some partition/table/database in certain zones, i.e. OK to place in any zone except a set of zones

```

Author: I've added this to unresolved questions, with a suggested syntax. Thus, I am going to resolve this comment for now.

It’s up to users to choose the right solution.

The semantics of partitioning are different to the default database policy. When a table is partitioned, the partitions will by default inherit the same placement policy as the table. This can be overwritten on a per-partition basis:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (id INT, name VARCHAR(50), purchased DATE)
 PARTITION BY RANGE( YEAR(purchased) ) (
  PARTITION p0 VALUES LESS THAN (2000) PLACEMENT POLICY='storeonhdd',
  PARTITION p1 VALUES LESS THAN (2005),
  PARTITION p2 VALUES LESS THAN (2010),
  PARTITION p3 VALUES LESS THAN (2015),

>   PARTITION p4 VALUES LESS THAN MAXVLUE PLACEMENT POLICY='storeonfastssd'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  PARTITION p4 VALUES LESS THAN MAXVALUE PLACEMENT POLICY='storeonfastssd'
```

 )
PLACEMENT POLICY='companystandardpolicy';
```

In this example, partition `p0` uses the policy `storeonhdd`, partition `p4` uses the policy `storeonfastssd` and the remaining partitions use the policy `companystandardpolicy`. Assuming the following `ALTER TABLE` statement is executed, only partitions `p1`-`p3` will be updated:

```sql
ALTER TABLE t1 PLACEMENT POLICY=`companynewpolicy`;
```

This behavior is inspired by how a `CHARACTER SET` or `COLLATE` attribute applies to a column of a table, and columns will use the character set defined at the table-level by default.

#### Removing placement from a database, table or partition

Placement policy can be removed from an object via the following syntax:
```sql

> ALTER DATABASE test [DEFAULT] PLACEMENT=default;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ALTER DATABASE test [DEFAULT] PLACEMENT SET DEFAULT;
```

This would be more in line with `ALTER TABLE ... ALTER COLUMN ... SET DEFAULT` and might also allow future things like `SET INACTIVE` etc.

ALTER TABLE t1 PLACEMENT=default;

> ALTER TABLE t1 ALTER PARTITION partition_name PLACEMENT=default;

Author: It should be the default of the table and not the cluster, because `=default` essentially makes it lose it's own definition and use the inheritance rules. I am adding an example for clarification.

#### Sequences

Sequence is typically used to allocate ID in `INSERT` statements, so the placement of sequences affects the latency of `INSERT` statements.

However, sequence is typically used with cache enabled, which means very few requests are sent to sequence. So defining placement rules of sequences is not supported for now.

#### DDL on tables

The placement policy is associated with the definition of the table (and visible in `SHOW CREATE TABLE`). Thus, if a table is recovered by `FLASHBACK` or `RECOVER`, it is expected that the previous rules will be restored.

Similarly, `TRUNCATE [TABLE]` does not change the definition of a table. It is expected that as new data is inserted, it will continue to respect placement rules.

#### SHOW DDL jobs

All statements related to placement rules must wait until PD returns. If the execution is interrupted, the job will be cancelled and the DDL will rollback, just like other DDL jobs.

> PD schedules regions asynchronously after it returns the message. TiDB can query the progress of scheduling from PD. The progress is observed by executing `SHOW PLACEMENT` (or using `information_schema.placement_rules`) instead of `ADMIN SHOW DDL JOBS`, because the DDL job finishes once PD returns a message.

Reviewer 9: Assume altering a table's leader placement from "zone+=bj" to "zone+=sh", it can happens that it's leader still remains in bj for a while after ddl execution succeed. How does tidb know that all regions of the table have completed the migration.

Reviewer 5: No progress indicator and easy PD API so far. It will eventually complete, though. Now the only way is to query which store the regions of tables are on, manually.

Author: It now says in the proposal a little bit clearer that this is asynchronous, and can be monitored in `SHOW PLACEMENT`.

Ongoing and finished statements can also be queried through `ADMIN SHOW DDL`, `ADMIN SHOW DDL JOBS`, or other similar statements.

### Privilege management

Privilege management is quite straightforward:

* `ALTER [DATABASE|TABLE]` statement requires `Alter` privilege
* `CREATE TABLE` statement requires `Create` privilege
* `information_schema.placement_rules` and `SHOW PLACEMENT` only shows the placement rules on the objects that visible to the current user
* `ADMIN SHOW DDL` requires `Super` privilege

> * `CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY`, `DROP PLACEMENT POLICY` and `ALTER PLACEMENT POLICY` require `PLACEMENT_ADMIN` (a new dynamic privilege). This is because these objects have global scope.

Reviewer: So a user can set the placement policy directly on their table/partition, but not create/alter a global placement policy? Maybe the namespace should be also per database, so a multi-tenant installation have use for it?

Author: I have added this to 'known limitations'.

Multi-tenant systems still work, but tenants can not create or modify the policies. I think this makes sense in practice, since the tenant should not be thinking about the physical provisioning.

However, TiDB also uses placement rules in some cases, as discussed in section "Querying placement rules". There are basically 2 ways to achieve this:

- Save the placement rules in table information, which will be duplicated with PD
- Only PD persists the placement rules, while TiDB caches a copy of them

Defining placement rules may fail, but the handling of this is simplified from earlier proposals. Because placement rules are specified in full (i.e. there is no longer syntax for `ALTER TABLE .. ADD PLACEMENT POLICY`), it is safe to automatically retry applying rules.

If the placement rules are stored on both TiKV and PD, the approaches to keep atomicity are as follows:

- Enforce a 2PC protocol on TiKV and PD.
- Store them on TiKV along with a middle state. If TiKV succeeds, then try PD, otherwise rollback it by the middle state. The DDL procedure guarantees the atomicity even if TiDB is down.

As a contrast, if the placement rules are stored only on PD, the approaches to keep atomicity are as follows:

- Write all the placement rules in one ETCD transaction.
- Persist a middle state on TiKV before sending to PD. This middle state acts as undo log.

> The comparison shows that both solutions are possible, but storing placement rules only on PD is more practical. To guarantee the transactional characteristics, the easiest way is to write all placement rules in a transaction and define them in serial on the TiDB side.

Reviewer 9: But it seems storing placement rules as part of infoschema data in tikv is more easy to make strong consistency with other metas like placement policy. After that we don't have to sync from PD for cases like "show create table". I think it is not hard to implement 2PC using current ddl change algorithm.

Reviewer 5: At the early stage of this project, it is hard, for PD API won't rollback, i.e. non-atomic. You will need to use TiDB to emulate transaction-like behaviors, which is not safe.

But, now, PD itself will rollback automatically in one HTTP request. So, yes, the thing changes: we can accept DDL middle states and DDL persistence on TiKV.

Reviewer 9: What do you mean by "rollback automatically in one HTTP request" ?

Reviewer 5: Say I post 4 rules to PD, if 3rd rule failed to apply, 1st/2nd rules will be applied anyway. So TiDB must rollback them.
2pc HTTP API for PD is not elegant, too, and they prefer rest API.
And one more thing, we can not post multiple rules in one request at the time, which makes the management of state even harder.

As a result, persisted on TiKV, and trying to manage state of PD was a disaster at the time. Now, the introduction of batch api/ rule bundles changed the game.

Author: I have clarified this better under implementation. PTAL again and let me know if it needs more details.

```sql
ALTER TABLE t1 PLACEMENT POLICY=`companynewpolicy`;
```

For the syntax:
```sql
ALTER TABLE pt
    EXCHANGE PARTITION p
    WITH TABLE nt;
```	

If `nt` has placement rules associated with it, they will be retained when it becomes a partition of table `pt`. However, if no placement rules have been specified, then the rules of the table `pt` will be used. This helps protect against the case that a partition may need to have "default" placement rules, but default does not mean what the table uses (the output of `SHOW CREATE TABLE` would appear ambiguous). When the partition `p` is converted to table `nt`, it will continue to use the rules it had as a partition (either explicitly listed for the partition or the default for the table).

This behavior is inspired by how a `CHARACTER SET` or `COLLATE` attribute applies to a column of a table, and columns will use the character set defined at the table-level by default.

#### Removing placement from a database, table or partition

Placement policy can be removed from an object via the following syntax:

```sql
ALTER DATABASE test [DEFAULT] PLACEMENT SET DEFAULT;

> ALTER TABLE t1 PLACEMENT=default;

Reviewer 12: Should it be `PLACEMENT POLICY`?

Author: Yes. Previously this would have made sense, but it should be `PLACEMENT POLICY` now that the direct placement options are all considered `table_options`.

Fixed in https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/26221/commits/ac3d02d9473ce638fda81caac74a5b2f8c38f97b

Since the cache is created, there must be a way to validate it. Different from region cache, placement rules cache can only be validated each time from PD. There are some ways to work around:

- Update the schema version once a placement rule is changed, just like other DDL. PD broadcasts the latest schema version to all the TiDB instances, and then TiDB instances fetch the newest placement rules from PD. There will be a slight delay for queries before reading the latest placement rules. The side effect is that more transactions will retry since the schema version is changed.
- TiDB queries placement rules from PD periodly. The delay is controllable but not eliminable.
- Once a placement rule is changed, PD broadcasts it to all the TiDB instances. In this approach, the schema version is not involved, so transactions are not affected. The delay is not eliminable either.

All the approaches above will result in a delay. Fortunately, for case 1 and 2 above, delay is acceptable. It doesn’t matter much if the optimizer doesn’t perceive the placement rules changement immediately. The worst result is that the latency is relatively high for a short time.

> For case 3, although delay is acceptable, but all TiDB instances must be always consistent on the placement rules. To achieve this goal, the schema version needs to be updated, thus transactions with old placement rules will fail when committed.

Author: My understanding is that the placement meta data is required to be correct so that local transactions can function correctly. i.e. if the location has been updated, the transaction might not be able to be function as a local trx any more.

> For case 3, although delay is acceptable, but all TiDB instances must be always consistent on the placement rules. To achieve this goal, the schema version needs to be updated, thus transactions with old placement rules will fail when committed.

Reviewer 5: Had discussed with ailinKid, just a note: the failure comes from schema version. 2pc/1pc/async check if they should fail by themselves. And, in my understanding, you can't strictly force the transaction to be updated with placement rules updated.

- DDL is rollbackable as the middle states can transform from one to another
- Updating schema version guarantees all active transactions are based on the same version of placement rules

### Building placement rules

> There needs a way to map the placement rules in SQL to PD placement rule configuration. Most of the fields are discussed above, so this part focuses on `group_id`, `id`, `start_key` and `end_key`.

Reviewer 5: We have special prefix in `group_id` and `id`, and yes 1:1.

> And how should the case of already existing rules in PD be handled?

Ignored. We can not prevent users from inserting rules to PD. They just should use PD-CTL if they use SQL...

> 

Reviewer: What is an object, a rule and a role here?

Author: Changing to `However, an object (database, table, partition) `..

> 

Reviewer: Old row nr 724
```
* Unpartitioned index: the concatenation of table id and index id, e.g. `100_1`
```
This seems to imply that we will support global indexes, (but not with ranges?)
Maybe remove this line?

Old row nr 731
```
As database IDs are all globally unique, it's fine to replace table ID with database ID in the key range. For example, assuming the database ID is 100, then the string format of its key range is:
```
Are they unique in the set of table_id's as well? Or should we simply add a new prefix for database ids? like 'd_<database_id>' or rather 's_<schema_id>'?

Reviewer 5: > Are they unique in the set of table_id's as well?

Yes, the current implentation assumed that for simplicity. But adding other prefixes is fine. It is an implementation detail.

It's same for partitioned tables.

### Rule priorities

Tables only inherit rules from databases when they are created, and the value is saved in the meta data. Thus, the rules of priorities are simplified from an earlier version of this proposal (and are more inline with how character sets are inherited).

> The only rules are that indexes and partitions inherit the rules of tables. Partitions can explicitly overwrite the placement policy, but indexes currently can not.

Reviewer: Maybe clarify that indexes are not possible to define placement rules for, they will be places together with their table data (table or partition)?

Thus the priority is:

```

> db --> table (on create only; and only when placement not explicitly specified)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
db --> table (Copied from db on create if placement not explicitly specified for the table)
```

  - The DDL statement to `ALTER TABLE t1 ADD PLACEMENT` has been removed from the proposal.
  - The DDL statement `CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY` has been added (allowing common configurations to be saved).
  - Configuring placement rules for indexes is no longer supported (we can add it once global indexes are added).
  - The inheritance rules have been simplified to match character set/collation inheritance.
2. There is a risk that we do not fully understand compliance requirements (see unresolved questions), or that the substaintial effort required to achieve compliance with DDL, internal SQL and DML.
3. Related to the above point, there is risk that the implementation of compliance requirements has significant burden on multiple teams, including ecosystem tools (Backup, CDC, DM). Even tools such as dumpling should ideally be able to backup placement rules in logical form.
4. There is some risk that a common use case can not be expressed in `CONSTRAINT` syntax, leading to complicated scenarios where users still need to express placement by using PD directly. Ideally, we can recommend users use SQL rules exclusively.

> 5. Many other features in TiDB are in development, some of which may influence placement rules. Clustered index affects the key format of primary index. Fortunately, the prefix of key range is untouched. Global secondary index largely affect the placement rules of partitioned tables. The key range of one global secondary index is not successive, so if it's necessary to define placement rules on the index, multiple rules should be generated in the PD. But for now, there's no such scenario.

Reviewer: Is not the range of one global secondary index successive?
From above:
```
* Unpartitioned index: the concatenation of table id and index id, e.g. `100_1`
```
Or how do you mean?

## Investigation & Alternatives

> For investigation, we looked at the implementation of placement rules in various datases (CockroachDB, Yugabyte, OceanBase).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For investigation, we looked at the implementation of placement rules in various databases (CockroachDB, Yugabyte, OceanBase).
```

The idea of using a `PLACEMENT POLICY` was inspired by how OceanBase has Placement Groups, which are then applied to tables. But the usage as proposed here is optional, which allows for more flexibility for casual cases. The idea of using a Placement Group can also be seen as similar to using a "tablespace" in a traditional database, but it's not completely the same since the choice is less binary (constraints allow the placement of roles for leaders, followers, learners etc.)

CockroachDB does not look to have something directly comparable to `PLACEMENT POLICY`, but it does have the ability to specify "replication zones" for "system ranges" such as default, meta, liveness, system, timeseries. Before dropping `ALTER TABLE t1 ADD PLACEMENT` from this proposal, it was investigated the CockroachDB does not support this syntax, presumably for simplification and minimising similar risks of misconfiguration.

> ## Unresolved Questions

Reviewer 5: I proposed a new syntax yesterday in the lurk after djshow832 summarized the meeting:

> IMO, the only bad part is that, I need to write twice "[+region=A,+zone=1] leader, [+region=A,+zone=1] follower" to configure region#A zone#1, while it can be expressed in one line "In region A  zone #1,  give me 1 leader and 1 follower".
>Maybe we can split the settings of CONSTRAINTS and other settings, .e.g.:
>1. Set replicas in another statement(syntactically) `ALTER TABLE ... SET CONSTRAINTS=xxx, SET FOLLOWER=3`.
>2. One constraints with multiple roles, `ALTER TABLE ...SET CONSTRAINTS=xxx LEADER=1 FOLLOWER=1`.

I still think `CONSTRAINTS=[...] LEADER=1 FOLLOWER=1` will be a good alternative to the `{xxx:1, vvv:2}` syntax. Since we don't really have `ADD PLACEMENT/DROP PLACEMENT` based on roles, we can assign rules based on `CONSTRAINTS`.

Author: Thanks, I will look again tomorrow.

Author: This has been incorporated. Thank you for the suggestion.

* **CDC**: Similar to `BACKUP`, it should not be possible to subscribe to changes for data in a different jurisdiction.
* **DDL**: The current implementation of DDL uses a centralized DDL owner which reads data from relevant tables and performs operations such as building indexes. The _read_ operation may violate compliance rules.
* **Internal SQL**: Similar to DDL, several centralized background tasks, such as updating histograms/statistics need to be able to _read_ the data.
* **DML**: It is not yet known which restrictions need to be placed on user queries. For example, if a poorly written user-query does not clearly target the `USA` partition when reading user data, should it generate an error because the `EUROPE` partition needs to be read in order for the semantics of the query to be correct? This may cause problems in development and integration environments if the restrictions can not be distilled into environments with smaller topologies.

> ### Behaviors

Reviewer 5: Maybe split behaviors into sub sections. I mean `### DROP PLACEMENT POLICY` and `### Options in SHOW CREATE TABLE`.

Author: I hope we discuss answers and I can remove these :-) Otherwise yes, I will add sub-sections.

> * The proposal says that `DROP PLACEMENT POLICY` should error if the policy is in use by any objects. This should be discussed, because it is not a common behavior in MySQL and may create some annoying debugging scenarios?

Reviewer 5: I would vote not to error. From the implementation perspective, policies are duplicated anyway, you don't know if it is in use trivially. And we don't have `EDIT PLACEMENT POLICY`, why bother to track the using state?

Author: What is the behavior of named placement policies if the named placement is dropped? Does `SHOW CREATE TABLE` just show the `CONSTRAINTS` without the `POLICY=x`? That seems acceptable to me. Showing the name (which no longer exists) does not.

Reviewer 5: Yes. Actually, it becomes easier if we don't output `POLICY=x` at all... :joy:

Author: I think we should output it though. If _table_options_ on `CREATE TABLE` + `ALTER TABLE` are not orthogonal, it creates strange debugging issues where the altered options don't seem to "stick" (at least for me, based on my expectations as a MySQL user).

IMHO there are two valid behaviors (if DROP is not an error):
1. The `DROP` "cascades", and all tables that have this policy are now restored to having the default placement.
2. The `DROP` just removes the named policy, and the output will instead show the same options but as `PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS ..`

The closest example I can think of in MySQL is dropping a ROLE which is assigned to a set of users. In which case, the [MySQL behavior](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/drop-role.html) here matches (1):

> A dropped role is automatically revoked from any user account (or role) to which the role was granted. Within any current session for such an account, its adjusted privileges apply beginning with the next statement executed.

Reviewer 5: > The DROP "cascades", and all tables that have this policy are now restored to having the default placement.

I would vote for this. It makes reasoning easier.

> The DROP just removes the named policy, and the output will instead show the same options but as PLACEMENT CONSTRAINTS ..

Maybe you will add a policy with the same name, then it becomes a trouble.

Author: I prefer (1) too, but it has another consequence: the other rule changes are currently defined as synchronously applied, but `DROP POLICY` waiting for all tables to change to the default scheme may be weird and confusing.

It may be better to define placement changes as asyncronous, and can be monitored with `SHOW PLACEMENT`. I will add this item to the "unanswered questions" section.

Reviewer 5: It is async anyway. PD HTTP API only promise it is posted and will take effect eventually. You could refer the discussion https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/26221#discussion_r669388467.

Author: The behavior of DROP is now documented. I have 'async' captured in the unresolved questions, so I am going to resolve this comment for now.

> * Are there risks to logical restore if creating a table with a non-existent `PLACEMENT POLICY` fails? This is the current proposal, but it can be changed to warning if it is an issue. If it can't be applied when creating the table, is the placement policy meta data dropped (and won't be picked up if that policy is created later?). This is regrettable, but seems like the most clear behavior because showing a non-defined `PLACEMENT POLICY` in `SHOW CREATE TABLE` is problematic.

Reviewer 5: Yes to `Are there risks to logical restore`. Showing comments is fine, we have system tables and another show. Maybe provide a switch for `SHOW CREATE TABLE` to enable the output of placement rules, disable by default.

Author: We could do a switch for either dumping (modify SHOW CREATE TABLE output) or restoring (become less strict). MySQL has examples of both:

For dumping, there is syntax like "SHOW CREATE DATABASE IF NOT EXISTS db_name", which will actually add "IF NOT EXISTS" to the output. There are also some SQL modes which modify show create table, but it's usually unwise to add new modes.

For restoring, logical dumpers usually execute `SET FOREIGN_KEY_CHECKS=0` to skip constraint checking.

I'm not sure what's the better path. I'll have to think about it.

The prefix of `id` is in such a format:

* Database: database id
* Table: table id
* Partition: partition id
* Unpartitioned index: the concatenation of table id and index id, e.g. `100_1`
* Partitioned index: the concatenation of partition id and index id

To query all the placement rules for one object, PD looks for all the `id` with a specific prefix.

As all placement rules are mapped to PD placement rule configurations, `start_key` and `end_key` must be generated for each object. However, databases and partitioned tables have no key ranges, so the only way is to generate a key range with no actual records.

As database IDs are all globally unique, it's fine to replace table ID with database ID in the key range. For example, assuming the database ID is 100, then the string format of its key range is:

- `start_key`: `t_{database_id}_`
- `end_key`: `t_{database_id+1}_`

It's same for partitioned tables.

### Rule priorities

Tables only inherit rules from databases when they are created, and the value is saved in the meta data. Thus, the rules of priorities are simplified from an earlier version of this proposal (and are more inline with how character sets are inherited).

> The only rules are that indexes and partitions inherit the rules of tables. Partitions can explicitly overwrite the placement policy, but indexes currently do not allow placement policy to be defined (this simplification was made intentionally since there is not a clear use case until global secondary indexes are introduced).

Reviewer 12: How about the following steps:
1. a placement rule is added on table `t`
2. a placement rule is added on partition `p0` of `t`
3. the placement rule is altered on table `t`
Will `p0` use this modified placement rule?

Author: Yes it will. See subheadings `Partitioned Tables` and `Optimization: Latest data on SSD` for examples.

	PARTITION pOther VALUES IN ('US', 'CA', 'MX')
);
```

What does `SHOW CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY europe` look like?

I assume that it is something like:

```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY europe CONSTRAINTS="+region=eu-west-1" RESTRICTED;
```

This specific semantic will be the hardest to implement because of the other dependencies in the server.

#### PD Balancing Behavior

In the case of `FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="[+region=us-east-1,+region=us-east-2]" FOLLOWERS=3`, is PD deterministic in balancing between each of the regions? If not, is it possible to ask PD to have certain scheduling/balancing policies.

Other examples of scheduling policies (versus scheduling constraints) have been proposed by [@nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch), which I will paraphrase here:

* `CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY p0 PRIMARY REGION="us-east-1" REGIONS="us-east-1,us-east-2" SCHEDULE=LOCALITY_IN_PRIMARY_REGION();`
* `CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY p1 PRIMARY REGION="us-east-1" REGIONS="us-east-1,us-east-2" SCHEDULE=LOCALITY_BY_ROW();`
* `CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY p2 PRIMARY REGION="us-east-1" REGIONS="us-east-1,us-east-2" SCHEDULE=SURVIVE_REGION_FAILURE();`

> The name `SCHEDULE` can be discussed, but in cases where there are 4 followers, being able to declaratively specify if you prefer full recovery over quick quorum is useful.

Reviewer 6: the name lgtm.

#### Should we have "built-in" placement policies?

> Examples could be "default", "system" etc. This might be helpful if you want to change the default or increase the follower count on system metadata.

Reviewer 6: Is`default` mean cluster replica setting? I think it's necessary, PD has a default placement rule once the cluster is created.  and I think we also need an easy way to config the `meta` range data, `system` table range data.

Author: `default` means what to do for cases where a placement policy has not been specified. Typically you would expect users only change the replica settings, since adjusting other properties might be risky for balance.

I could see it being useful in an example like "Optimization: Multi-tenancy / control of shared resources". You might want to say that certain tikv servers are reserved and not supposed to be used for placement unless there is a placement policy.

If you think it is useful, I will add it into the proposal.

In such a way, the most granular rule always works.

## Examples

### Optimization: Follower read in every region

This optimization is straight forward:
```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY local_stale_reads FOLLOWER_CONSTRAINTS="{+us-east-1:1,+us-east-2:1,+us-west-1:1,+us-west-2:1}";
CREATE TABLE t (a int, b int) PLACEMENT POLICY=`local_stale_reads`;
```

### Optimization: Latest data on SSD

This optimization uses labels to define the storage type:

```sql
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY storeonfastssd CONSTRAINTS="[+disk=ssd]";
CREATE PLACEMENT POLICY storeonhdd CONSTRAINTS="[+disk=hdd]";

CREATE TABLE t1 (id INT, name VARCHAR(50), purchased DATE)
 PARTITION BY RANGE( YEAR(purchased) ) (
  PARTITION p0 VALUES LESS THAN (2000) PLACEMENT POLICY='storeonhdd',
  PARTITION p1 VALUES LESS THAN (2005),
  PARTITION p2 VALUES LESS THAN (2010),
  PARTITION p3 VALUES LESS THAN (2015),
  PARTITION p4 VALUES LESS THAN MAXVALUE PLACEMENT POLICY='storeonfastssd'
 )
PLACEMENT POLICY='companystandardpolicy';
```

### Optimization: Multi-tenancy / control of shared resources

> This example is similar to latest data on SSD. The customer has a large TiDB Cluster with several workloads that are running on it. They might want to reduce the blast radius of individual users impacting eac-hother, and potentially improve QoS.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
This example is similar to latest data on SSD. The customer has a large TiDB Cluster with several workloads that are running on it. They might want to reduce the blast radius of individual users impacting each-other, and potentially improve QoS.
```

	PARTITION pEurope VALUES IN ('DE', 'FR', 'GB') PLACEMENT POLICY='europe',
	PARTITION pOther VALUES IN ('US', 'CA', 'MX')
);
```

However, the definition is not valid. The unique index on `username` can not be enforced, because there are no global indexes for partitioned tables.

In the future we will need to be able to define the index for `username` as a global index, and allow it to have different placement rules where it can be read from all regions.

This example also demonstrates that this specification only provides partition level placement (and not row-level or column level security). The workaround for the user will require splitting the table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
	id INT NOT NULL auto_increment PRIMARY KEY,
	/* public details */
);

CREATE TABLE user_details (
	user_id INT NOT NULL,
	/* private columns */
	/* partition this table */
);
```

Assuming that global indexes can be added to the TiDB server, this use-case can be improved. But for correct execution the server will also require the following functionality:
- The ability to mark global indexes as invisible at run-time if the `PLACEMENT POLICY` does not permit them to be read.

> - The ability to mark the clustered index as invisible. i.e. in the case that there is a global unique index on `username` it may be permitted to be read, but a read of the `username` from the clustered index might need to be disabled.

Reviewer 13: any explaination about the second ability? why a global index with placement rule should turn back the access from cluster index.

Author: The global index here functions as a column-level access, so the placement policy allows it to be read by all regions, but the full row is not permitted to be read. This could also be implemented with "column level access" instead, where the clustered index might be able to be read, but certain columns are geo restricted.

- Complex scenarios may exist where there is not a column in the current table which can be used to partition the table into different regions, but instead there is a column which is a foreign key to another table from which this information can be determined. In this scenario, the user will be required to "denormalize" the usage and move the parent_id into the child table so geo-partitioning is possible.
- Because direct assignment and `PLACEMENT POLICY` are mutually exclusive, it results in some scenarios where users that just want to make one small change on a placement policy need to create a new policy. This is intentional to limit the risk of misconfiguration.

## Unresolved Questions

### Compliance Requirements

For compliance use-cases, it is clear that data at rest should reside within a geographic region. What is not clear is which (if any) circumstances data in transit is permitted to leave. There are several known issues which will need to be resolved:

> * **Backup**: The `BACKUP` SQL command (and br) accept a single location such as `s3://bucket-location/my-backup` to centralize the backup. This centralization likely violates compliance requirements (assuming there are >=2 requirements that conflict on a single cluster). Backing up segments of data individually is both an inconsistent backup, and likely to result in misconfiguration which violates compliance rules. Users have a reasonable expectation of backup integration with compliance placement rules.

Reviewer 5: The current implementation only persists on PD. But it may change in the future dev.

> * **Backup**: The `BACKUP` SQL command (and br) accept a single location such as `s3://bucket-location/my-backup` to centralize the backup. This centralization likely violates compliance requirements (assuming there are >=2 requirements that conflict on a single cluster). Backing up segments of data individually is both an inconsistent backup, and likely to result in misconfiguration which violates compliance rules. Users have a reasonable expectation of backup integration with compliance placement rules.

Author: Yes, they should be part of the `*model.TableInfo` JSON serialization.
